.TH OPEN 2 2020-01-11 "nightingale" "nightingale Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
open - open a file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.I #include <fcntl.h>
.PP
.I int open(char *filename, int flags);
.I int open(char *filename, int flags, int mode);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR open ()
opens the file named by the relative path
.I filename
according to permissions specified in
.I flags
and
.IR mode .
.PP
If the flag
.B O_CREAT
is set,
.BR open ()
will attempt to create
.I filename
with permissions specified by
.IR mode .
The file descriptor returned by
.BR open ()
when
.B O_CREAT
is specified is always writeable, even if
.I mode
does not allow writing. This is to allow data to be added to a file that will
be read-only after that point.
.PP
Below is a description of every supported flag:
.TP
.B O_CREAT
Attempt to create the file.
.TP
.BR O_RDONLY ", " O_WRONLY ", or " O_RDWR
Specify read-only access, write-only access, or both respectively.
.TP
.B O_TRUNC
Truncate the file, removing any content. The file is otherwise unchanged.
.SH RETURN VALUE
.BR open ()
returns a new file descriptor acting as a reference to the requested file if it succeeds.
If
.BR open ()
fails, it returns -1 and one of the errors described below is indicated.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B ENOENT
.I filename
does not exist, and
.B O_CREAT
was not specified.
.TP
.B EACCES
O_CREAT was specified, and the working directory is not a directory
.TP
.B ETODO
O_CREAT was specifed, and
.I filename
included one or more '/' characters. See BUGS.
.TP
.B EPERM
.I flags
included O_RDONLY, but
.I filename
is not readable
.TP
.B EPERM
.I flags
included O_WRONLY, but
.I filename
is not writeable
.SH CONFORMING TO
Maybe someday
.SH NOTES
.SH BUGS
.TP
.BR open ()
currently only supports creating files directly in the current working directory.
.SH EXAMPLE
.EX
#include <fcntl.h>

int main() {
    int fd = open("text_file", O_RDONLY);
}
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR open (2),
.BR write (2),
.BR fread (2)
.SH COLOPHON
.PP
This document is part of the nightingale project.
The project can be found online at
.UR https://github.com/tyler569/nightingale
.UE .
