.TH CTYPE 3 "2025" "Nightingale" "Nightingale Library Functions"
.SH NAME
isalnum, isalpha, isdigit, isxdigit, islower, isupper, isspace, isblank,
iscntrl, isprint, isgraph, ispunct, tolower, toupper \- character classification and conversion
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <ctype.h>
.PP
.BI "int isalnum(int " c ");"
.BI "int isalpha(int " c ");"
.BI "int isdigit(int " c ");"
.BI "int isxdigit(int " c ");"
.BI "int islower(int " c ");"
.BI "int isupper(int " c ");"
.BI "int isspace(int " c ");"
.BI "int isblank(int " c ");"
.BI "int iscntrl(int " c ");"
.BI "int isprint(int " c ");"
.BI "int isgraph(int " c ");"
.BI "int ispunct(int " c ");"
.PP
.BI "int tolower(int " c ");"
.BI "int toupper(int " c ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These functions check whether
.IR c ,
which must have the value of an
.I unsigned char
or
.BR EOF ,
falls into a certain character class according to the current locale.
.TP
.BR isalnum ()
checks for an alphanumeric character; it is equivalent to
.BI "(isalpha(" c ") || isdigit(" c "))" \fR.
.TP
.BR isalpha ()
checks for an alphabetic character; equivalent to
.BI "(isupper(" c ") || islower(" c "))" \fR.
.TP
.BR isdigit ()
checks for a digit (0 through 9).
.TP
.BR isxdigit ()
checks for a hexadecimal digit (0-9, a-f, A-F).
.TP
.BR islower ()
checks for a lowercase character (a-z).
.TP
.BR isupper ()
checks for an uppercase character (A-Z).
.TP
.BR isspace ()
checks for white-space characters.
These are: space, form-feed ('\\f'), newline ('\\n'),
carriage return ('\\r'), horizontal tab ('\\t'), and vertical tab ('\\v').
.TP
.BR isblank ()
checks for a blank character; that is, a space or a tab.
.TP
.BR iscntrl ()
checks for a control character (ASCII 0-31 and 127).
.TP
.BR isprint ()
checks for any printable character including space (ASCII 32-126).
.TP
.BR isgraph ()
checks for any printable character except space (ASCII 33-126).
.TP
.BR ispunct ()
checks for any printable character which is not a space or an
alphanumeric character.
.TP
.BR tolower ()
converts the letter
.I c
to lower case, if possible.
If
.I c
is not an uppercase letter, it is returned unchanged.
.TP
.BR toupper ()
converts the letter
.I c
to upper case, if possible.
If
.I c
is not a lowercase letter, it is returned unchanged.
.SH RETURN VALUE
The values returned are nonzero if the character
.I c
falls into the tested class, and zero if not.
.PP
.BR tolower ()
and
.BR toupper ()
return the converted character, or
.I c
if the conversion was not possible.
.SH NOTES
The Nightingale implementation uses simple ASCII character classification
and does not support locales.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR string (3)
