.TH PRINTF 3 "2025" "Nightingale" "Nightingale Library Functions"
.SH NAME
printf, fprintf, sprintf, snprintf \- formatted output conversion
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <stdio.h>
.PP
.BI "int printf(const char *" format ", ...);"
.BI "int fprintf(FILE *" stream ", const char *" format ", ...);"
.BI "int sprintf(char *" str ", const char *" format ", ...);"
.BI "int snprintf(char *" str ", size_t " size ", const char *" format ", ...);"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The functions in the
.BR printf ()
family produce output according to a
.I format
as described below.
The functions
.BR printf ()
and
.BR fprintf ()
write output to
.IR stdout
and to the given output
.IR stream ,
respectively.
.PP
.BR sprintf (),
and
.BR snprintf ()
write to the character string
.IR str .
.PP
The function
.BR snprintf ()
writes at most
.I size
bytes (including the terminating null byte ('\\0')) to
.IR str .
.PP
.BR sprintf ()
is equivalent to
.BR snprintf ()
with no size limit (unsafe for unbounded input).
.PP
These functions write the output under the control of a
.I format
string that specifies how subsequent arguments are converted for output.
.SS Format String
The format string is a character string, beginning and ending in its initial
shift state, if any.
The format string is composed of zero or more directives: ordinary characters
(not
.BR % ),
which are copied unchanged to the output stream; and conversion specifications,
each of which results in fetching zero or more subsequent arguments.
.PP
Each conversion specification is introduced by the character
.BR % ,
and ends with a
.IR "conversion specifier" .
In between there may be (in this order) zero or more
.IR flags ,
an optional minimum
.IR "field width" ,
and an optional
.IR precision .
.SS Conversion Specifiers
.TP
.BR d ", " i
The
.I int
argument is converted to signed decimal notation.
.TP
.BR u
The
.I "unsigned int"
argument is converted to unsigned decimal notation.
.TP
.B o
The
.I "unsigned int"
argument is converted to unsigned octal notation.
.TP
.BR x ", " X
The
.I "unsigned int"
argument is converted to unsigned hexadecimal notation.
.B x
uses lowercase letters;
.B X
uses uppercase letters.
.TP
.B c
The
.I int
argument is converted to an
.IR "unsigned char" ,
and the resulting character is written.
.TP
.B s
The
.I "const char\ *"
argument is expected to be a pointer to a character string.
Characters from the string are written up to (but not including) a
terminating null byte ('\\0').
.TP
.B p
The
.I "void\ *"
pointer argument is printed in hexadecimal.
.TP
.B %
A '%' is written.
No argument is converted.
.SS Flags
.TP
.B #
The value should be converted to an "alternate form".
For
.BR x " and " X ,
a nonzero result has the string "0x" (or "0X") prepended to it.
.TP
.B 0
The value should be zero padded.
.TP
.B +
A sign (+ or \-) should always be placed before a number produced by a
signed conversion.
.TP
.B (space)
A blank should be left before a positive number produced by a signed conversion.
.SH RETURN VALUE
Upon successful return, these functions return the number of characters
printed (excluding the null byte used to end output to strings).
.PP
The functions
.BR snprintf ()
and
.BR vsnprintf ()
do not write more than
.I size
bytes (including the terminating null byte ('\\0')).
If the output was truncated due to this limit, then the return value
is the number of characters (excluding the terminating null byte)
which would have been written to the final string if enough space
had been available.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR puts (3),
.BR write (2)
