.TH STRFTIME 3 "2025" "Nightingale" "Nightingale Library Functions"
.SH NAME
strftime \- format date and time
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <time.h>
.PP
.BI "size_t strftime(char *restrict " s ", size_t " max ","
.BI "                const char *restrict " format ","
.BI "                const struct tm *restrict " tm ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR strftime ()
function formats the broken-down time
.I tm
according to the format specification
.I format
and places the result in the character array
.I s
of size
.IR max .
.PP
The format specification is a null-terminated string and may contain
special character sequences called
.IR "conversion specifications" ,
each of which is introduced by a '%' character and terminated by
some other character known as a
.IR "conversion specifier character" .
All other character sequences are
.IR "ordinary character sequences" .
.PP
The characters of ordinary character sequences (including the null byte)
are copied verbatim from
.I format
to
.IR s .
However, the characters of conversion specifications are replaced as shown
in the list below.
.SS Conversion Specifiers
.TP
.B %a
The abbreviated name of the day of the week (Sun-Sat).
.TP
.B %A
The full name of the day of the week (Sunday-Saturday).
.TP
.B %b, %h
The abbreviated month name (Jan-Dec).
.TP
.B %B
The full month name (January-December).
.TP
.B %c
The preferred date and time representation.
.TP
.B %C
The century number (year/100) as a 2-digit integer.
.TP
.B %d
The day of the month as a decimal number (01-31).
.TP
.B %D
Equivalent to %m/%d/%y.
.TP
.B %e
Like %d, the day of the month as a decimal number, but a leading zero
is replaced by a space.
.TP
.B %F
Equivalent to %Y-%m-%d (the ISO 8601 date format).
.TP
.B %H
The hour as a decimal number using a 24-hour clock (00-23).
.TP
.B %I
The hour as a decimal number using a 12-hour clock (01-12).
.TP
.B %j
The day of the year as a decimal number (001-366).
.TP
.B %m
The month as a decimal number (01-12).
.TP
.B %M
The minute as a decimal number (00-59).
.TP
.B %n
A newline character.
.TP
.B %p
Either "am" or "pm" according to the given time value.
.TP
.B %r
The time in a.m. or p.m. notation (hh:mm:ss am/pm).
.TP
.B %R
The time in 24-hour notation (%H:%M).
.TP
.B %S
The second as a decimal number (00-60).
.TP
.B %t
A tab character.
.TP
.B %T
The time in 24-hour notation (%H:%M:%S).
.TP
.B %u
The day of the week as a decimal, 1-7, Monday being 1.
.TP
.B %w
The day of the week as a decimal, 0-6, Sunday being 0.
.TP
.B %x
The preferred date representation without the time.
.TP
.B %X
The preferred time representation without the date.
.TP
.B %y
The year as a decimal number without a century (00-99).
.TP
.B %Y
The year as a decimal number including the century.
.TP
.B %z
The +hhmm or -hhmm numeric timezone (always +0000 in Nightingale).
.TP
.B %Z
The timezone name or abbreviation (always "UTC" in Nightingale).
.TP
.B %%
A literal '%' character.
.SH RETURN VALUE
If the total number of resulting bytes including the terminating null byte
is not more than
.IR max ,
.BR strftime ()
returns the number of bytes placed in the array
.IR s ,
not including the terminating null byte.
Otherwise, zero is returned, and the contents of the array are undefined.
.SH NOTES
Some conversion specifiers (like %g, %G, %U, %V, %W) are not fully
implemented and will output "?" instead.
.PP
The Nightingale implementation assumes UTC timezone.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR btime (2),
.BR printf (3)
