.TH STRING 3 "2025" "Nightingale" "Nightingale Library Functions"
.SH NAME
strcpy, strncpy, strlen, strcmp, strncmp, strchr, strrchr, strstr, strpbrk \- string operations
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <string.h>
.PP
.BI "char *strcpy(char *" dest ", const char *" src ");"
.BI "char *strncpy(char *" dest ", const char *" src ", size_t " n ");"
.BI "size_t strlen(const char *" s ");"
.BI "int strcmp(const char *" s1 ", const char *" s2 ");"
.BI "int strncmp(const char *" s1 ", const char *" s2 ", size_t " n ");"
.BI "char *strchr(const char *" s ", int " c ");"
.BI "char *strrchr(const char *" s ", int " c ");"
.BI "char *strstr(const char *" haystack ", const char *" needle ");"
.BI "char *strpbrk(const char *" s ", const char *" accept ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.SS strcpy()
The
.BR strcpy ()
function copies the string pointed to by
.IR src ,
including the terminating null byte ('\\0'),
to the buffer pointed to by
.IR dest .
The strings may not overlap, and the destination string
.I dest
must be large enough to receive the copy.
.SS strncpy()
The
.BR strncpy ()
function is similar to
.BR strcpy (),
except that at most
.I n
bytes of
.I src
are copied.
If there is no null byte among the first
.I n
bytes of
.IR src ,
the string placed in
.I dest
will not be null-terminated.
.SS strlen()
The
.BR strlen ()
function calculates the length of the string pointed to by
.IR s ,
excluding the terminating null byte ('\\0').
.SS strcmp()
The
.BR strcmp ()
function compares the two strings
.I s1
and
.IR s2 .
The locale is not taken into account (comparison is done using unsigned
characters).
It returns an integer less than, equal to, or greater than zero if
.I s1
is found, respectively, to be less than, to match, or be greater than
.IR s2 .
.SS strncmp()
The
.BR strncmp ()
function is similar, except it compares only the first (at most)
.I n
bytes of
.I s1
and
.IR s2 .
.SS strchr()
The
.BR strchr ()
function returns a pointer to the first occurrence of the character
.I c
in the string
.IR s .
.SS strrchr()
The
.BR strrchr ()
function returns a pointer to the last occurrence of the character
.I c
in the string
.IR s .
.SS strstr()
The
.BR strstr ()
function finds the first occurrence of the substring
.I needle
in the string
.IR haystack .
The terminating null bytes ('\\0') are not compared.
.SS strpbrk()
The
.BR strpbrk ()
function locates the first occurrence in the string
.I s
of any of the bytes in the string
.IR accept .
.SH RETURN VALUE
.BR strcpy ()
and
.BR strncpy ()
return a pointer to the destination string
.IR dest .
.PP
.BR strlen ()
returns the length of the string
.IR s .
.PP
.BR strcmp ()
and
.BR strncmp ()
return an integer less than, equal to, or greater than zero if
.I s1
(or the first
.I n
bytes thereof) is found, respectively, to be less than, to match,
or be greater than
.IR s2 .
.PP
.BR strchr ()
and
.BR strrchr ()
return a pointer to the matched character or NULL if the character is not found.
The terminating null byte is considered part of the string,
so that if
.I c
is specified as '\\0', these functions return a pointer to the terminator.
.PP
.BR strstr ()
returns a pointer to the beginning of the located substring,
or NULL if the substring is not found.
.PP
.BR strpbrk ()
returns a pointer to the byte in
.I s
that matches one of the bytes in
.IR accept ,
or NULL if no such byte is found.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR memcpy (3),
.BR memmove (3),
.BR memcmp (3),
.BR memchr (3)
